[Excel] (Range) Reorganize Range articles to improve discoverability and usability (#2582)
OfficeDev/office-js-docs-pr: docs/excel/excel-add-ins-ranges-special-cells.md

ms.date: 04/02/2021 
localization_priority: Normal
---

# Find special cells within a range using the Excel JavaScript API

This article provides code samples that show how to find special cells within a range using the Excel JavaScript API. For the complete list of properties and methods that the `Range` object supports, see the [Excel.Range class](/javascript/api/excel/excel.range).

## Find ranges with special cells

The [Range.getSpecialCells](/javascript/api/excel/excel.range#getspecialcells-celltype--cellvaluetype-) and [Range.getSpecialCellsOrNullObject](/javascript/api/excel/excel.range#getspecialcellsornullobject-celltype--cellvaluetype-) methods find ranges based on the characteristics of their cells and the types of values of their cells. Both of these methods return `RangeAreas` objects. Here are the signatures of the methods from the TypeScript data types file:

```typescript
getSpecialCells(cellType: Excel.SpecialCellType, cellValueType?: Excel.SpecialCellValueType): Excel.RangeAreas;
```

```typescript
getSpecialCellsOrNullObject(cellType: Excel.SpecialCellType, cellValueType?: Excel.SpecialCellValueType): Excel.RangeAreas;
```

> The following example uses the `getSpecialCells` method to find all the cells with formulas. About this code, note:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code sample uses the `getSpecialCells` method to find all the cells with formulas. About this code, note:
```

- It limits the part of the sheet that needs to be searched by first calling `Worksheet.getUsedRange` and calling `getSpecialCells` for only that range.
- The `getSpecialCells` method returns a `RangeAreas` object, so all of the cells with formulas will be colored pink even if they are not all contiguous.

```js
Excel.run(function (context) {
    var sheet = context.workbook.worksheets.getActiveWorksheet();
    var usedRange = sheet.getUsedRange();
    var formulaRanges = usedRange.getSpecialCells(Excel.SpecialCellType.formulas);
    formulaRanges.format.fill.color = "pink";

    return context.sync();
})
```

If no cells with the targeted characteristic exist in the range, `getSpecialCells` throws an **ItemNotFound** error. This diverts the flow of control to a `catch` block, if there is one. If there isn't a `catch` block, the error halts the method.

> If you expect that cells with the targeted characteristic should always exist, you'll likely want your code to throw an error if those cells aren't there. If it's a valid scenario that there aren't any matching cells, your code should check for this possibility and handle it gracefully without throwing an error. You can achieve this behavior with the `getSpecialCellsOrNullObject` method and its returned `isNullObject` property. The following example uses this pattern. About this code, note:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you expect that cells with the targeted characteristic should always exist, you'll likely want your code to throw an error if those cells aren't there. If it's a valid scenario that there aren't any matching cells, your code should check for this possibility and handle it gracefully without throwing an error. You can achieve this behavior with the `getSpecialCellsOrNullObject` method and its returned `isNullObject` property. The following code sample uses this pattern. About this code, note:
```

> - The `getSpecialCellsOrNullObject` method always returns a proxy object, so it is never `null` in the ordinary JavaScript sense. But if no matching cells are found, the `isNullObject` property of the object is set to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `getSpecialCellsOrNullObject` method always returns a proxy object, so it's never `null` in the ordinary JavaScript sense. But if no matching cells are found, the `isNullObject` property of the object is set to `true`.
```

> - It calls `context.sync` *before* it tests the `isNullObject` property. This is a requirement with all `*OrNullObject` methods and properties, because you always have to load and sync a property in order to read it. However, it is not necessary to *explicitly* load the `isNullObject` property. It is automatically loaded by the `context.sync` even if `load` is not called on the object. For more information, see [\*OrNullObject methods and properties](../develop/application-specific-api-model.md#ornullobject-methods-and-properties).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It calls `context.sync` *before* it tests the `isNullObject` property. This is a requirement with all `*OrNullObject` methods and properties, because you always have to load and sync a property in order to read it. However, it's not necessary to *explicitly* load the `isNullObject` property. It's automatically loaded by the `context.sync` even if `load` is not called on the object. For more information, see [\*OrNullObject methods and properties](../develop/application-specific-api-model.md#ornullobject-methods-and-properties).
```

- You can test this code by first selecting a range that has no formula cells and running it. Then select a range that has at least one cell with a formula and run it again.

```js
Excel.run(function (context) {
    var range = context.workbook.getSelectedRange();
    var formulaRanges = range.getSpecialCellsOrNullObject(Excel.SpecialCellType.formulas);
    return context.sync()
        .then(function() {
            if (formulaRanges.isNullObject) {
                console.log("No cells have formulas");
            }
            else {
                formulaRanges.format.fill.color = "pink";
            }
        })
        .then(context.sync);
})
```

> For simplicity, all other examples in this article use the `getSpecialCells` method instead of  `getSpecialCellsOrNullObject`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicity, all other code samples in this article use the `getSpecialCells` method instead of  `getSpecialCellsOrNullObject`.
```

## Narrow the target cells with cell value types

The `Range.getSpecialCells()` and `Range.getSpecialCellsOrNullObject()` methods accept an optional second parameter used to further narrow down the targeted cells. This second parameter is an `Excel.SpecialCellValueType` you use to specify that you only want cells that contain certain types of values.

> [!NOTE]
> The `Excel.SpecialCellValueType` parameter can only be used if the `Excel.SpecialCellType` is `Excel.SpecialCellType.formulas` or `Excel.SpecialCellType.constants`.

### Test for a single cell value type

The `Excel.SpecialCellValueType` enum has these four basic types (in addition to the other combined values described later in this section):

- `Excel.SpecialCellValueType.errors`
- `Excel.SpecialCellValueType.logical` (which means boolean)
- `Excel.SpecialCellValueType.numbers`
- `Excel.SpecialCellValueType.text`

> The following example finds special cells that are numerical constants and colors those cells pink. About this code, note:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code sample finds special cells that are numerical constants and colors those cells pink. About this code, note:
```

> - It will only highlight cells that have a literal number value. It will not highlight cells that have a formula (even if the result is a number) or a boolean, text, or error state cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It only highlight cells that have a literal number value. It won't highlight cells that have a formula (even if the result is a number) or a boolean, text, or error state cells.
```

- To test the code, be sure the worksheet has some cells with literal number values, some with other kinds of literal values, and some with formulas.

```js
Excel.run(function (context) {
    var sheet = context.workbook.worksheets.getActiveWorksheet();
    var usedRange = sheet.getUsedRange();
    var constantNumberRanges = usedRange.getSpecialCells(
        Excel.SpecialCellType.constants,
        Excel.SpecialCellValueType.numbers);
    constantNumberRanges.format.fill.color = "pink";

    return context.sync();
})
```

### Test for multiple cell value types

> Sometimes you need to operate on more than one cell value type, such as all text-valued and all boolean-valued (`Excel.SpecialCellValueType.logical`) cells. The `Excel.SpecialCellValueType` enum has values with combined types. For example, `Excel.SpecialCellValueType.logicalText` targets all boolean and all text-valued cells. `Excel.SpecialCellValueType.all` is the default value, which does not limit the cell value types returned. The following example colors all cells with formulas that produce number or boolean value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes you need to operate on more than one cell value type, such as all text-valued and all boolean-valued (`Excel.SpecialCellValueType.logical`) cells. The `Excel.SpecialCellValueType` enum has values with combined types. For example, `Excel.SpecialCellValueType.logicalText` targets all boolean and all text-valued cells. `Excel.SpecialCellValueType.all` is the default value, which does not limit the cell value types returned. The following code sample colors all cells with formulas that produce number or boolean value.
```
